              

              
                     Scripting "Delver Engine" using RDASM

     by Bryce Schroeder (bryce.schroeder@gmail.com  http://www.bryce.pw )



 "Cythera" and "Delver" are trademarks of either Glenn Andreas or Ambrosia 
 Software, Inc. 


 --- WHAT IS RDASM? ---

    RDASM is a an assembly language targeting the Delver Engine's virtual
machine, the key component of the scripting system in Cythera. It is an 
invention of the redelv project; DelvEd used a superficially python-like
high-level language to do scripting. (Known only from the "GainExp" fragment
posted by Glenn Andreas.) Both of these languages produce the same sort of 
output - compiled code for the virtual machine to execute. (In theory, one 
might compile any language to run on this virtual machine.) The scripting 
system is used throughout Cythera and defines almost all behaviors of things 
in the game. RDASM can be used to modify the behaviors of exisiting objects 
and even alter more fundamental aspects of the gameplay, such as game 
mechanics.

    RDASM is also paired with a disassembler, which allows the user to study
how existing scripts in Cythera work. One can disassemble a script, modify it
in symbolic form, and then reassemble the modified script - a much easier 
alternative to editing the scripts in binary form with a hex editor.


 --- CONCEPTS ---

    If you are familiar with programming languages, and in particular with
assembly language, you may wish to skip this section. That said, RDASM is
somewhat unlike most assembly languages, because the Delver virtual machine
is unlike most virtual machines.

    An RDASM program is a text file containing, essentially, a list of 
instructions for Delver to execute. In the simplest case, each line of the
file represents one instruction, and each is executed one at a time, starting
at the first line. Moving beyond that simple case, some instructions may
alter the flow of the program - instructing the virtual machine to skip some
instructions if certain conditions are present, to repeat previous lines
several times (say, once for each character in the party), or to transfer 
control to code that is located in another resource entirely. 

    The Delver virtual machine is a so-called "stack machine", though an odd
sort of one. This is contrasted to a "register machine." Most real computers,
including those based on Intel x86, PowerPC or 68k processors, are register 
machines. In contrast, most commonly used virtual machines, such as the Java
virtual machine, are stack machines. Stack machines store data temporarily in
a data structure called a stack, which is a first-in-first-out structure.

    If you are not familiar with the concept of a "stack", you can think of 
it as being like a stack of cards. You can remove a card from the top of the
stack ("pop" it, in jargon) or put a card on top of the existing cards (i.e.
"push" it), but you are not allowed to access cards other than the one at the
top of the stack. This is why a stack is described as first-in-first-out: one
has to pop the things one more recently pushed onto the stack first, before
one can pop things that were pushed on earlier.

    If you are familiar with assembly language for a stack-based virtual
machine, or with stack-based programming languages like FORTH or PostScript,
RDASM will be reasonably familiar, although it is rather weakly stack-based - 
it doesn't use its stack as much as it might have. RDASM also uses braces {}, 
brackets [], and parenthesis (), which are used to structure the code. The 
usage of each is explained below.


 --- STATEMENTS ---
    A category of instructions termed 'statements' are characterized by the 
fact that they can appear outside of parenthesis. For example, 'print' is a
statement, and 'mul' is not. You can place print as the first instruction
in the body of a procedure, but you can't place mul there. In fact, if RDASM
didn't check for this error, placing mul outside a statement would have the
curious effect of printing the letter 'J' to the Delver console when the 
script was executed, because, coincidentally, the machine-language encoding 
of 'mul' is 0x4A, which is the same as the encoding of the letter 'J' in 
ASCII. Statements are encoded with instructions with first bytes greater 
than or equal to 0x80, whereas those with first bytes less than 0x80 are not.
For example, 0x880123 encodes an unconditional jump to the absolute address
0x0123 in the same resource, a statement, whereas 0x420123 pushes the number
0x0123 onto the stack - which is not a statement.

    Although some statements, such as goto, encode all the information they 
need to do whatever it is they are supposed to do in the instruction itself,
others operate on operands pushed into a stack. (This is by far the more 
versitile approach, since, for example, the place a goto instruction jumps
to has to be decided on at the time the script is assembled from its source
code. On the other hand, a print statement can print out anything that is
pushed onto its stack - that could be known at assembly-time, but it might
instead be the result of a computation.)

    In RDASM, instructions that encode parameters in themselves (i.e. that
take "immediate" values) are followed by numbers, or by symbolic names that
represent numbers. For example:

    goto 0x0123

Or:
    goto foo

    Both of these instructions might be encoded in machine language as
0x880123, and in the latter case, 'foo' represents the hexidecimal number
0x0123. But by calling it 'foo' instead of manually specifying the number, 
we are asking RDASM to keep track of where in the resource 'foo' is, and 
figure out the number for us. ('foo' is a label, and somewhere else in the 
source code, we will have the text 'foo:' to tell the assembler where we want 
to start executing instructions when we tell it "goto foo".) Automating this 
sort of  bookkeeping is really the main reason for having an assembler at 
all.

 --- PARENTHESIS ---

    In contrast, other instructions may get their parameters from the stack.
This is depicted in RDASM by the use of parenthesis. For example:

    print (
        pushc "Hello, Delver!"
    )

    The instruction pushc pushes a string (a null-terminated sequence of 
characters) onto the stack. (You can abbreviate it to "push", and let RDASM
figure out that you mean pushc from the context - i.e. from the fact that it
is immediately followed by a null-terminated string constant.) The 
instruction print, which has a stack (you can tell from the parentheses that
follow it), runs the code in its paranthesis, and then prints out onto the
the Delver console whatever thing is on the top of the stack.

    Note that if you push more than one thing onto the stack of the print
instruction, only the last thing you pushed onto the stack - that is, the 
item on the top of the stack - will be popped off and printed. The rest are
discarded. Each set of parenthesis represents a completely separate stack.

    Some instructions have more than one set of parenthesis, each of which is
a seperate stack. Other instructions use more than one item from a single
stack, i.e. they pop off two or more items from the stack instead of just 
one. This latter way is how instructions that call functions normally work.
There are also instructions which have both immediate data and also have a
stack, for example the 'goto ... if' statement:

    goto foo if ( pusha arg0 )

    'foo', the label to go to, is immediate, but the condition is a stack. In
this example, if arg0 is true, then program execution will continue at the
label 'foo', elsewhere in the program. If it is not true, the next 
instruction immediately after the 'goto ... if' statement will be executed.

    One instruction has the dubious distinction of combining all of these
forms, 'callri' (call resource with index). The base index of the resource
is given as immediate data, the index to add to that is provided by one
stack of which only the top item is used,  and then another stack following
it provides the arguments to the function called. This is seen, for example,
in the potion object, excerpted below:

    callri POTION_SCRIPTS
        ( push item 
          field Prop.aspect)
        ( push character 
          cast 0x40)
        
    The instructions are all documented on the redelv wiki, here:
    http://www.ferazelhosting.net/wiki/rdasm

    On a lower level, the individual operations are documented here:
    http://www.ferazelhosting.net/wiki/Delver%20Script%20Opcodes


 --- BRACES ---

    Certain structures (classes and functions) use braces to delinate their
scope. Unlike parenthesis, which can be mapped one-to-one to machine-language
constructs (the opcode 0x40 corresponds to a close-parenthesis, basically), 
braces are strictly something that is part of RDASM. The assember uses it to
define the scope of symbolic names.
    
    There are four kinds of scope in RDASM: global, resource, class and
method scope. The global scope is a special scope that is shared across,
potentially, many files. In contrast, a symbol defined in the resource scope
is limited to the current resource. A symbol defined in class scope is only
meaningful between the opening brace { and closing brace } of a class 
definition, and a symbol defined in function scope is only meaningful between
the opening and closing braces of the function definition it is associated
with. 

    Only three instructions are currently associated with braces: 'class',
'data' and 'function', for example:

    class {
        signal foo: function(self, arg1) {
            'The name of arg1 is: '
            print (  push arg1  push)
            return ( push 0x00 )
        }
        signal bar: array [1 2 3]

        signal zot: None
    }

These are explained in more detail elsewhere.
